618 to 907 AD
=============

Keywords
--------

* ``zhang bo``
* ``zhang bo``
* ``areas metallurgy``
* ``yin``
* ``talk zhang``

Events
------

* (618--868) Tang Chao ``Thaj Tshoj``. Hmong flourished in the areas of metallurgy, business, and trade :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Zhang Bo Jing ``Tsab Pej Ceem`` led a war against the Tang Emperor. The Tang Emperor during this time was Yuan He. Zhang Bo Jing gathered the support of multiple ethnic group from Funan, Guizhou, and Guangxi using a blood drinking ceremony. The people of Zhang Bo Jing suffered a horrible agricultural season from heavy rain and were forced into construction work :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``11-811``: The Tang Emperor Xian Zong removed the governor of Funan for ineffectiveness against stopping Zhang Bo Jing. After serious defeats, Xian Zong called soldiers from Hubei, Guangdong, Guangxi, and Fujian to fight against Zhang Bo Jing. By this time, Zhang Bo Jing created opertional headquarters at Chang Zhou and Xu Zhou. Zhang Bo Jing's strategy became mainly a defensive one choosing locations of battles that were difficult to attack but easy to defend :cite:`1997:wu`.
* After suffering nine major battle defeats, the Tang Emperor called for a meeting. The group had 2 factions, one espousing more military campaigns and the other favoring the use of diplomatic measures. The group eventually decided to hold talks with Zhang Bo Jing. Talks with Zhang Bo Jing ended the war. The Hmong were granted increased autonomy in certain regions :cite:`1997:wu`.
* The Tang Dynasty entered its final days and a period of chaos nearing anarchy came to be. The ruler of Funan, Ma Yin, wanted to increase his territory and took the opportunity of the circumstances to attack Hmong people in the Five Lakes Region. Several Hmong leaders rose to challenge Ma Yin. Among the Hmong leaders were Pan Jin Sheng (Phab Ceeb Seem) from Cheng Zhou (Tsheej Tsawb), Yang Cheng Lu (Yaj Tsheej Lis), Song Ye (Xoom Yig) from Cheng Zhou (Tshaj Tsawb), and Chang Shi Yi (Tshab Xib Yij) from Xu Zhou (Xyim Tsawb). Ma Yin's first attack was at Fei Shan Dong (Feb Sab Toom), where he was met with forces led by Pan Jin Sheng, Song Ye, and Shi Yi. Meanwhile, Yang Cheng Lu, attacked Ma Yin's headquarter at Wu Gang (Vws Kab) :cite:`1997:wu`.
