699 to 500 BC
=============

Keywords
--------

* ``autumn chu``
* ``battle``
* ``chu attack``
* ``zheng wei``
* ``attack huang``
* ``autumn man``
* ``attack xu``
* ``cai``
* ``attack chu``
* ``jin``

Events
------

* ``9-684``: A man of Chu defeated the Cai host at Xin, and carried off Lord of Cai :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Autumn, A man of Chu attacked Zheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``12-678``: Lu, Qi, Song, Chen, Wei, Zheng, Xu, Huo, Teng, made common cause at You :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Summer, A man of Chu made a state visit to Lu :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Autumn, Chu attacked Zheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``7-659``: A man of Chu attacked Zheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``8-659``: Lu, Qi, Song, Zheng, Cao, Zhu met at Cheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Winter, A man of Chu attacked Zheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Summer, Qu Wan of Chu came to make a covenant with the invading host; the covenant was made at Shao-ling. A man of Qi made prisoner Yuan Tao-hu of Chen :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Autumn, Lu, Jiang, and Huang attacked Chen :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``1-656``: Lu, Qi, Song, Chen, Wei, Zheng, Xu, Cao, attacked Cai. The Cai dispersed; they then invaded Chu, halting at Xin :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``8-656``: Lu Prince arrived from attacking Chu :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``12-656``: Gongsun Zi led the Lu host, and with contingents from Qi, Song, Wei, Zheng, Xu, and Cao, invaded Chen :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Summer, Lu, Qi, Song, Chen, Wei, Zheng, Xu, and Cao met with the Royal Heir Presumptive at Shou-zhi
* ``8-655``: The above made a covenant in Shou-zhi. The Ruler of Zheng left the meeting, and did not covenant. A man of Chu extinguished Xian; the Master of Xian fled to Huang :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Summer, Lu, Qi, Song, Chen, Wei, and Cao attacked Zheng and invested Xin-Cheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Autumn, A man of Chu invested Xu. The above forthwith went to the rescue of Xu :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Winter, Lu Prince arrived from attacking Zheng :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Winter, A man of Chu attacked Huang :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Summer, A man of Chu extinguished Huang :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* Spring, A man of Chu attacked Xu :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* ``3-645``: Lu, Qi, Song, Chen, Wei, Zheng, Xu, and Cao covenanted at Mou-qiu, and forthwith encamped at Kuang. Gongsun Gao led the force and with the above went to the relief of Xu :cite:`2007:umass_chron`.
* In the winter, King Cheng of Chu struck at Song, the ally of Jin most accessible from the south. In retaliation, an expeditionary force under Duke Wen of Jin marched south in the spring of next year and occupied Wei and Cao, both satellites of Chu. Both sides sought out alliances in the following months. The states of Shen, Xi, Chen, Cai, all immediately contiguous to Chu, sided with King Cheng, as well as the more distant Lu :cite:`2007:wiki_chengpu`.
* Battle of Chengpu (城濮之戰) between the states of Jin against Chu and its allies. Viewed as the first great battle in the protracted conflict between the states of the Yellow River valley, and the states of the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang) valley. The Jin victory confirmed the hegemony of Duke Wen and checked Chu ambitions in the north for at least a generation. The battle, however, was not effective in the long term in restricting the power of Chu :cite:`2007:wiki_chengpu`.
* King Zhuang of Chu. His exploits gave rise to Four Character Idioms. 606 BC: King Zhuang of Chu sent out an envoy to the court of King Dingwang of Zhou to express his will to swallow the royal domain of Zhou :cite:`2007:ck_zhou`. 611 BC: King Zhuang of Chu annexed state of Yong. 591 BC: King Zhuang of Chu died.
* King Zhuang of Chu crushed the small state of Chen :cite:`2007:ck_zhou`.
* King Zhuang of Chu crushed the small state of Zheng. Qi state declared allegiance to Chu :cite:`2007:ck_zhou`.
* Jin fought with Qi at the battle of An. Chu declared war on Jin :cite:`2007:ck_zhou`.
* After a period of increasingly exhaustive warfare, Qi, Qin, Jin and Chu finally met for a disarmament conference where the other states essentially became satellites :cite:`2007:wiki_springautumn`.
* Chu first attacked Zheng and Wei :cite:`2007:ck_zhou`.
* Chu lose battle to Jin at battle of Yanling :cite:`2007:ck_zhou`.
* King Kong of Chu Kingdom sent fleet to attack Wu Kingdom :cite:`1997:deng`.
* (549--476) Twenty recorded naval battles between Wu and Chu Kingdoms :cite:`1997:deng`.
* Chu began to register its people for taxation and military purposes :cite:`2005:hardy`.
* Jin and Chu mutually ended war against each other and took over 14 smaller states :cite:`2007:wiki_springautumn,2007:ck_zhou`.
* Prince Guang of Wu twice sent fleet to attack the coast of the Chu Kingdom :cite:`1997:deng`.
