907 to 960 AD
=============

Keywords
--------

* ``found khitan``
* ``shiguo``
* ``song ye``
* ``emperor kai``
* ``lu``

Events
------

* (907--960) Wudai Shiguo (Swj Kuj)
* (907--1125) Liao Chao founded by Khitan :cite:`2007:ck_liao`.
* The Liao Emperor, Kai Ping, gave more power to Ma Yin :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``12-4-910``: Pan Jin Sheng and Song Ye went on the offensive attacked Ma Yin. Song Ye was able to take Xiangxiang quickly.
* The Liao Emperor sent Lu Shi Zhou to attack the Hmong. Lu Shi Zhou first attacked Yang Cheng Lu at Wu Gang. Lu Shi Zhou had placed his troops in key locations and guarding the roads. Yang Cheng Lu's men were unable to penetrate through Lu Shi Zhou's line of defense to escape, and took heavy losses from cannons. After Yang Cheng Lu was killed, the captured men of Yang Cheng Lu were forced to take the Liao troops to Fei Shan Dong where Pan Jin Sheng was located. Pan Jin Sheng was overwhelmed and captured with 3,000 of his men. Pan Jin Sheng was taken back to Wu Gang and killed. Lu Shi Zhou was able to achieve victory by multiplying his army, spreading their attacks, and using cannons. In one day, Lu Shi Zhou was able to take over Wu Gang and Fei Shan Dong. Pan Jin Sheng's 14 years of war against the Tang and Liao Dynasties came to an end. Song Ye and Chang Shi Yi reconciled with Ma Yin, who gave them control of Chang Zhou and Xu Zhou. Yang Cheng Lu's younger brother, Yaj Txiam Nyeeb, was forced to concede his territory but was given control over Fei Zhou. Yaj Txiam Nyeeb divided his territory into 10 parts for his 10 sons to govern: Zheng Long, Zheng Yuan, Zheng Xiu, Zheng Yue, Zheng Kuan, Zheng Wan, Zheng Yan, Zheng Song, Zheng Quan, and Zheng Qin :cite:`1997:wu`. Yaj Txiam Nyeeb called his territory Shi Dong Shou Ling or Fei Shan Ling Gong. People of the Yang Clan become the diplomats of this territory :cite:`1997:wu`. Hmong people entered into a policy of self-rule but with recognition of Liao Emperor :cite:`1997:wu`.
