960 to 1200 AD
==============

Keywords
--------

* ``chao xoom``
* ``found jurchen``
* ``chao``
* ``chao``
* ``yaj``
* ``ling``
* ``change``
* ``chao``
* ``song``
* ``song emperor``

Events
------

* (960--1279) Song Chao (Xoom Tshoj)
* (960--1126) Northern Song Chao (Beisong Chao) :cite:`2007:ck_song`.
* (960--1126) Southern Song Chao (Nansong Chao) :cite:`2007:ck_song`.
* (1038--1227) Western Xia Chao (Xixia Chao) founded by Tanguts :cite:`2007:ck_xixia`.
* Song Emperor began systematic sinicization of Hmong territories. Imperial troops are moved into Hmong territories under the pretext of help. Wars and bounty are declared against Hmong. Old boundaries are destroyed with the defeat of Hmong, and new ones are drawn to reflect Chinese dominance. Ethnic Han are also encouraged to take and live on former Hmong territories. Five Lakes Region was also a prime target for destruction and assimilation :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Hmong began revolt against Song Emperor led by Yang Sheng Tai (Yaj Seem Thaij) and retake Five Lakes Region. Song Emperor and his commanders began to realize the problem Hmong people would pose against their campaigns to dominate, and an official even recommended retreat. When commanders reported the futility of conquering such a place, the Song Emperor finally issued a stop to the wars :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``11-1102``: Yang Guang Xing (Yaj Kua Xyeej) conceded to Song Emperor the name changes of territories in Five Lakes Region. Cheng Zhou was changed to Qing Zhou; Fei Zhou was changed to Shi Zhu :cite:`1997:wu`.
* (1115--1234) Jin Chao founded by the Jurchen :cite:`2007:ck_jin`.
* Song Emperor continued to restructure Hmong territory. Jing Zhou was created to administer over the Five Lakes Region. As the Song Dynasty began to weaken, it also levied heavy taxes against the Hmong people which included taking their crop productions :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Yaj Txiam Xeeb began revolt against Song Emperor at Ling Jang (today known as Ling Kou at Qing Xiang) :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Song forces led by Wu Xi defeated Yaj Txiam Xeeb :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Remnants of Yaj Txiam Xeeb's forces attacked Song troops at Wu Yang. Song emperor issued a cease fire. Yaj Ceem Ceeb along with 300 brought gold to Song Emperor; in exchange, the Song Emperor is recorded to 300 coins to the Hmong :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Other leaders, Yang Zheng Xiu and Yang Jing Yong, also came under Song emperor :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``3-1154``: Yaj Txiam Xeeb led Hmong and Mien against Song Emperor again. Song Emperor respond by sending Li Dao to fight Yaj Txiam Xeeb :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``7-1154``: Yaj Txiam Xeeb and his two sons, Yaj Tseem Xyaw and Yaj Tseem Koo, are defeated and killed. Their defeat was attributed to their small numbers :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Song Emperor began to include Hmong into official positions to prevent further uprisings. This policy seemed to have stopped the armed conflicts between the Song Emperor and Hmong :cite:`1997:wu`.
