1200 to 1368 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``attack ying``
* ``wu``
* ``fourth``
* ``wu``
* ``yuan``
* ``xi``
* ``tian ban``
* ``call ntawv``
* ``china yuan``
* ``city numerous``

Events
------

* (1271--1368) Yuan Chao (Yeej Tshoj) Hmong are classified as Cooked and Raw. The rapid cultural change of Hmong people began through the Cook Hmong between the Raw Hmong and Chinese :cite:`2007:wiki_revolt`. Hmong in Funan were recorded trading with Arabs. Hmong began exporting goods with wood work and food ingredients :cite:`1997:wu`. The Yuan Dynasty classified the people of China into 4 classes from highest to lowest: Mongolians, Se Mu (western people), Han, and Naj Fab (southern people). The Naj Fab received the worst of treatment from the Mongolian rulers. When the Mongolians attacked the Naj Fab people, both Hmong and Chinese stood to fight :cite:`1997:wu`.
* A Hmong writing system called, Ntawv Puaj Txwm, is claimed to have been created :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* What is known today as Guizhou was permanently made a part of China by the Yuan dynasty :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Wu Tian Ban (Vwj Theeb Pov) and Yang Liu Zong (Yaj Luj Txoov) rebelled against Yuan Emperor in Guizhou. The Yuan Emperor sent You Cheng Wei Yuan Shuai and Wang Zhe Ti Mu Er to stop the rebellion :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``2-1347``: Wu Tian Ban attacked Ying Zhou :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``5-1347``: Wu Tian Ban attacked and took Wu Gang. You Chen Sha Ban is sent by Yuan Emperor to retake Wu Gang :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``7-1347``: Wu Tian Ban attacked Ying Zhou for a second time. He took the city of Xi Pu and Xyi Sheng Xi :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``9-1347``: Wu Tian Ban attacked and took Wu Gang again. Wu Tian Ban also took Bao Qing (today's Shao Yang Shi) :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``10-1347``: Wu Tian Ban attacked Ying Zhou for a third time. The Imperial troops fled without a fight :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``11-1347``: Wu Tian Ban attacked and took Jing Zhou. They defend the city against numerous attacks :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``3-1348``: Wu Tian Ban attacked Ying Zhou for a fourth time :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``11-1348``: Wu Tian Ban took a major city in Guangxi province. Multiple cities, areas, and the Five Lakes Region come under Hmong control. Smaller ethnic groups from Guizhou and Guangxi provinces also join in on Wu Tian Ban's rebellion :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``3-1349``: Wu Tian Ban attacked Ying Zhou for a fifth time. Wu Tian Ban's headquarter is destroyed. Yang Liu Zong is caught and killed :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``12-1349``: Wu Tian Ban attacked and took Sheng Zhou (today's Yin Ling Xian). Wu Tian Ban also infiltrated Hubei and Funan. His control spread through Guangxi, Guizhou, Hubei, and Funan provinces. After his death, some of his men were led by Liu Fu Tong (Lwj Fuj Thoob) :cite:`1997:wu`.
