1368 to 1600 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``xian capture``
* ``force wear``
* ``li``
* ``enemy``
* ``li``
* ``campaign exterminate``
* ``qing``
* ``soldier catch``
* ``miao hmoob``
* ``bao capture``

Events
------

* (1368--1644) Ming Chao (Meej Tshoj) Ming Dynasty began strict control of empire. In Hmong territories, taxes were raised and soldiers were sent out to guard and patrol key locations. Hmong crops were also taken by the government :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Hmong rebellion recorded in Xwm Leej but was quickly put down :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``2-28-1405``: Hmong are referred to as Raw Hmong (Sheng Miao, Hmoob Nyoos) and Cooked Hmong (Shu Miao, Hmoob Siav) as recorded in the book Ming Shi Lu :cite:`2019:aaa`.
* ``7-1405``: Ming official named, Gong Neng, wrote to the Ming Emperor stating :cite:`2019:aaa`, "A Raw Hmong leader named, Liao Biao, of 25 Hmong villages in Gang Zi Ping, with 453 house holds, have come under you." Guo ZiZhang reported in his book Qing Ji :cite:`2019:aaa`, "The Hmong are descendants of the Jiuli and San Miao kingdoms. These Hmong have only first names, and belong to no clans; they lack ethnic identity and an emperor. The Hmong living on Chinese soil are called Cooked Hmong. They are used to collect taxes and work for Chinese officials; they think like the Chinese; therefore, the Chinese want them to be citizens. They resigned their fate to the Emperor. The ones that do not want to be Chinese people are called Raw Hmong. There are more Raw Hmong than Cooked Hmong." Lu Ci Yun wrote in his book Dong Xi Qian Zhi :cite:`2019:aaa`, "The Cooked Hmong are closer. The Raw Hmong are farther. The Cooked Hmong's life toil like horses and ox, such that I cannot begin to describe." Feng Xiang Xing wrote in his book Miao Su Ji Wen :cite:`2019:aaa`, "From Yuan Zhou to the West are mostly Hmong. There is more Hmong in Guizhou and Yunnan provinces. The Hmong have a differences along the lines of Cooked and Raw. The Raw Hmong lived in the wilderness. We have not seen the Raw Hmong. The Cooked Hmong raise taxes for the Emperor and work like the Chinese. We see the Cooked Hmong everywhere." Gong Zi's book Miao Min Kao :cite:`2019:aaa`, "The Hmong who come under the Emperor are Cooked Hmong. They are not that much different from the Chinese. The Raw Hmong are the ones remote from our areas. We do not understand their words, and their beliefs are different."
* Guizhou became a province of Imperial China under the Ming dynasty. Guizhou was described by both Chinese and western sources as a place of harsh environmental conditions and the people there as :cite:`1994:jenks` "distressingly poor."
* Li Tian Bao rebelled. He took over a few zhou and provinces; Xing Ning (Xeeb Leej), Xwm Leej, Xeeb Huam (Xin Huan), Ceem Tsawb, and Hui Tong (Feem Thooj) :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Hmong take over territories in Guizhou from Li Ping (Lis Pheej) to Tian Zhu (Theeb Tswv) :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``11-1450``: Relatives of the Ming Emperor, Hui Zha and Hui La, in Wu Gang, conspired to overthrow the emperor. They gather the Hmong from Meng Neng (Moob Neeb), Cheng Tian Zi (Tsheej Theeb Ntxwv), Yang Wen Bo (Yaj Veej Pov), and Jing Long Xi (Ceeb Looj Xyib). They are also joined by Hmong from Pu Ding (Phwv Tseem), Yong Ning (Yoos Leej), and Bi Ji (Pij Cij). The conspiracy would be revealed later and thwarted. Other conspiracies to overthrow the Ming Emperor are also discovered :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``12-1450``: Ming Emperor ordered Wang Jing to take soldiers from Liang Qiang (Laj Chaj) to fight against Hmong. The Hmong stood their ground :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``7-1452``: The Ming Emperor ordered Ma Jing and Cang Jiang Li Zheng to attack Hmong at Qing Fei Shan. Qing Fei Shan's defense was led by a Hmong named Yang Guang Qing (Yaj Kuab Cheej). Yang Guang Qing's defense is overwhelmed and 560 of his men including himself are taken captive :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``2-1454``: Li Tian Bao won a major victory in Guizhou at Cheej Toob :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``9-1454``: Li Tian Bao attacked Ming headquarter at Long Li :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Li Tian Bao, a Miao king, "Martial and Majestic King," (Wulie Wang) rebelled in Guizhou :cite:`1994:jenks`. Li Tian Bao is selected by Hmong as Emperor Wu Li, and the year is marked as the First Year of the Emperor Wu Li. Li Tian Bao's control is spread and his influence grew :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``2-1455``: Meng Neng, one of the leaders with Li Tian Bao, is killed at Ping Xi Wei :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Li Tian Bao is captured and taken to be executed at Beijing :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``12-1460``: Ming Emperor ordered more campaigns to exterminate Hmong :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Ming Emperor Cheng Hua reported in Tong Jiang Qang Mu San Pian :cite:`1997:wu`, "The Hmong of Wu Gang, Yeej Ceem, and Tong Gu have started to rebell. There is also problems in Guizhou."
* Ming Emperor reported :cite:`1997:wu`, "Hmoob have began to create trouble in Wu Gang, Ceem Tsawb, and Funan. There is war again."
* Lis Txawj Vam began rebellion in Xwm Leej and Tsheej Pum. They had a yellow flag. Lis Txawj Vam is selected as Emperor Li Tian Wang (Huabtais Theeb Vaj) by the Hmong. Emperor Li Tian Wang took redivided the land back to the citizens for cultivation. Li Tian Wang had popular support and many young men enlisted in his service. Li Tian Wang took over as many as 40 cities in Guangxi province :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``10-1501``: Ming Emperor ordered Yan Zhong Yu and Xi Qi to attack Li Tian Wang. A total of 57,000 troops are gathered to attack the Hmong. The troops were split into major divisions for multi-prong attack. Troops were also sent to guard roads to block communications between the Hmong. More troops were also called as Ming troops were put into place. Hmong soldiers were using the natural advantages of the environment to defend their territories. In fear of Cooked Hmong cooperation with Raw Hmong, the Cooked Hmong were given fertilizers as a token of good faith; although the Chinese kept a close eye out on them. The outnumbered Hmong responded with the military strategy of "Fast--Slow." The Fast--Slow strategy was as follows. Fast: When the enemy is small then attack. When the enemy is tired, the fight them in close quarters. When the enemy runs, then persue. Slow: When the enemy comes then hide. When the enemy rest, then harass. When the enemy is many, then use the environment as defense and to your advantage. Before the enemy attacks, set traps for him :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``11-1501``: After a few setbacks, the Ming troops changed tactics against the Hmong. They resorted to use fire to smoke out Hmong and guns as first line of attacks. They also laid sieged on cities held by Hmong; when the Hmong exhausted the resources, then the Ming troops would move in to take over; 40 cities held by Hmong were taken over in this way. About 1,571 Hmong soldiers died; 400 Hmong women were tortured :cite:`1997:wu`.
* ``12-1501``: Li Tian Wang and 2,000 Hmong soldiers are caught and killed :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Hmong are forced to wear Chinese clothes :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Hmong led by Zheng Xi Huang Ji (Tseem Xyi Faj Ci) rebelled in Xwm Leej :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Li Zheng (Lis Tseem) and Duang Wen Jian (Tuam Veej Ceem) rebelled in Xwm Leej. They were defeated by Tong Chang (Thooj Tshav) and Wang Zhong (Vaj Tsoo) :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Qi Ting Xian (Chij Thee Xyam) and Xiao Zi Ling (Xyob Txiv Leej) led Hmong and Mien uprising in Xwm Leej. They were fought by Zhang Yue (Tsab Yuj), Zhang Yu (Tsab Yim) and He Jing (Huj Ceem) :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Qi Ting Xian is captured :cite:`1997:wu`.
