1700 to 1800 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``hmong fight``
* ``tu``
* ``side hmongs``
* ``qing``
* ``hmong``

Events
------

* Miao ethnography of Qing Dynasty begins with Miao Album (Miaoman Tu or Bai Miao Tu) compiled by officials governing frontier areas :cite:`2006:hostetler`.
* Hmong territory began to be taken over by Qing Emperor. After observing Guizhou, E Er Tai wrote to the Qing Emperor a letter called Gai Tu Gui Liu stating the replacement of native officials with Qing officials. The Qing Emperor let it be known that the land was his and everything produced on his land belong to him and not the people. Native officials were replaced with new Qing administrations: Fu (Fwv), Zhou (Tsawb), Ting (Theeb), and Xian (Xyeem). In regions of Raw Hmong, war was brought to confiscate the land and positions of Tong Zhi (Thooj Tsib) would govern the area :cite:`1997:wu`. The regions with native officials were in Hu Guang province: San Zhi, Rong Mei, Yong Shun, Mao Gang, Cheng Zhou, and Hui Zhou. Also in Yun Gui province: Si Zhou, Si Nan, Bo Zhou, Shui Xi, Wu Meng, Zheng Xiong, Lin An, and Dong Chuan. Also in Sichuan province: Nan Yang, Lei Bu, Shi Ye, Ping Cha, Yi Mei, and Diu Ba. Also in Guangxi province: An Long, Xi Long Zhou, Shang Ling, Xi Ling Xian, and Si Cheng. From 1726 to 1736, all these cities were taken over by Qing officials :cite:`1997:wu`. The regions in Raw Hmong territory without native officials were in Xyab Xyib in Funan. Also in Qing Shui Jiang, Li Ping, Du Yun, Lei Gong, and Shan Qu in Guizhou. Also a few more places across Funan, Guizhou and Guangxi :cite:`1997:wu`. Qing soldiers were sent to patrol Hmong territories. They were responsible for farming to make their own living, and confiscated all good land away from Hmong. Taxes were also increased :cite:`1997:wu`. Many of the old Hmong leaders were still alive. There were 60 Zhang Guang Si (Tsab Kuas Xib) and many more Tu Si (Thwv Xib) still alive :cite:`1997:wu`.
* Hmong began to rise up against Qing Dynasty. The Raw Hmong fought primarily to protect their territories. The Cooked Hmong fought to protect for equality :cite:`2019:aaa`.
* (1735--1738) In Southeast China, Guizhou, fighting between the Hmongs and Chinese erupted over farming and territorial disputes. 8 counties and 1,000 cities took part on the side of the Hmongs, and by the end of the war, 17,670 military men were killed, 13,000 were enslaved and 11,000 were imprisoned on the side of the Hmongs :cite:`2000:xiong`.
* (1795--1806) A period of intense fighting between the Hmongs and Chinese erupted near Guizhou, Hunnan and Sichuan. Wu Bayue, Shu Liaoting, Shu Sanbao and Hu Tianban were the Hmong leadership in this war. Wu Bayue was capture and killed as the Hmongs are again defeated :cite:`2000:xiong`. Fighting occurred due to mass influx of poor Chinese looking for land into Hmong territory :cite:`1978:fairbank`. After defeat of Hmong, agricultural colonies were set up and the Hmong were placed under military discipline. Trade was also supervised by officials. Chinese education was introduced and Hmong were also forbidden to practice their religion, while at the same time, more Han settlers transgressed into Hmong territory :cite:`1978:fairbank`.
