1800 to 1900 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``boxer``
* ``take zhengyaun``
* ``kuanyi take``
* ``dujiang``
* ``suiyang``
* ``chinese retake``
* ``chinese xiaoshung``
* ``rebellion``
* ``china begin``
* ``capture leigongshan``

Events
------

* Hmongs began migration into northern Lao mountain area :cite:`2000:lf`.
* Opium was the only cash crop in northern Laos for the Hmongs :cite:`2000:lf`.
* The Miao tribes of Kuangsi and Hunan, led by a man who either received or adopted the title of the Golden Dragon, rebelled. The rebellion was due to dissatisfaction of the tribesmen with the glaring injustice they were suffering at the hands of the local authorities. After some initial massacres and reprisals, a general was sent to put an end to the outbreak; but so far from doing this, he seems to have come off second best in most of the battles which ensued, and was finally driven into Kuang-tung. For this he was superseded, and two Commissioners dispatched to take charge of further operations. It occurred to these officials that possibly persuasion might succeed where violence had failed; and accordingly a proclamation was widely circulated, promising pardon and redress of wrongs to all who would at once return to their allegiance, and pointing out at the same time the futility of further resistance. The effect of this move was magical; within a few days the rebellion was over :cite:`2006:giles`.
* (1839--1842) The Opium War between Imperial China and Great Britain began. The Opium War and Treaty of Nanjing opened parts of China to the outside world, leading to Western encroachment that places China under semicolonial status :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Kaitong Lo PaSy and son, Lo BliaYao, brought Hmong followers out of China to escape persecution. Lo PaSy settled in Tonkin among the already well established Kaitong Ly NhiaVu and his people. Kaitong Lo PaSy would shortly relocate to Nong Het in Laos :cite:`2005:lee,1999:hamilton`.
* (1851--1864) The Taiping Rebellion against Imperial China began :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* (1851--1868) In the Huaibei region, the Nian revolted against Imperial China :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Hu Linyi wrote about rebels in China: "They die as bandits or they die from starvation, but they die, and that is all. If they break the law as bandits, they can postpone death; if they simply endure starvation, they will die forthwith." :cite:`1994:jenks`
* (1854--1873) The Maio rebellion took place in Guizhou against Imperial China. In the 20 years struggle, the population of 7 million Miao suffered 4.9 million deaths. The Miao rebellion was not believed to be the result of the sole Miao insurgency and ethnic hostility. Many minority ethnicities, the Hans and Muslims included, were involved in the rebellion in Guizhou. The rebellion composed of 49% Han, 40% Miao and 11% Muslim. This rebellion was termed the Miao rebellion by Imperial China because the Miao were involved with virtually all uprisings and remained the foundation for the rebellion :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Zhang Xiumei led the Hmongs against the Chinese. He is captured and executed in Hunnan. His dying words are for the Hmongs to never give up their homeland and assimilate under the Chinese, and he also promised to return to help the Hmongs. Betrayal is believed to be the ultimate deciding factor in the defeat of the Hmongs :cite:`2000:xiong`.
* ``3-25-1854``: Yang Yuanbao, a Bouyei, started a rebellion at Fengning. This revolt started a chain reaction of insurgency in Guizhou :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``5-18-1854``: Yang Yuanbao was captured by the Chinese at Xilishan, Guangxi, and sent to Guiyang for execution :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``9-27-1854``: Yang Longxi, another Bouyei, seized control of Tongzi city, and continued insurgency fever by using slogans successfully to rally troops :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* (1855--1864) In Yunnan, Muslims rebelled against Imperial China :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``4-22-1855``: Yang Longxi was killed near Gezhuangsi by direct military efforts of Chinese Han Chao. Miao on the side of Han Chao observed the frailty of Qing troops :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``4-30-1855``: Miao took the Tiagong subprefrectural seat. Han Chao was commissioned to resolve the uprising. The Miao demanded a stop to taxes and return of all land occupied by Chinese belonging to the Miao :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``8-1-1855``: Lo Guangming and Lo Tianming, Miaos from the Bazhai-Danjian area, led Miao rebellion :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``9-9-1855``: Lo Guangming, with inside collaborator of Dujiang magistrate, Yu Zhengji, took Dujiang :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``10-24-1855``: Miao rebels took Danjiang after a 3 months seige :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-1-1855``: Boyei, Zou Shengbao, the former lieutenant of Yang Longxi, started his own rebellion at Tongzi-Suiyang border :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-11-1855``: Red Signals (Honghao) seized prefectural seat of Tongren in rebellion of taxes and property. The leaders of this rebellion were Xu Tingje and Mei Jiding from Shangwudong. They were aided/manipulated by religious sect leaders (Wu Laogu, Chen Fulin, Xu Xing) who were described as having powerful magic to transform ordinary people into martial arts experts/practioners with just water :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-16-1855``: Miao took the walled garrsion town of Datang :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-22-1855``: Miao took the departmental seat of Luohu :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``12-6-1855``: Lo Guangming took the subprefectural Xiajiang and controlled it for 7 years to come :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``12-10-1855``: Lo Guangming took the subprefectural Bazhai and controlled it for 16 years to come :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Kaitong Ly NhiaVu relocated from Tonkin to Nong Het :cite:`2005:lee`.
* (1856--1860) The Arrow War took place over four years as the Qing dynasty was continually challenged by foreign 'barbarians' :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``2-1-1856``: Religious sect leaders of Red Singals were killed :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``2-17-1856``: Brigade-General Tong Panmei captured Datang and claimed the killing of 4,000-5,000 rebels and capturing 6,000-7,000 rebels :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``3-25-1856``: Chinese Xiaoshung took Luohu :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``6-1-1856``: Miao troops sent back from helping Chinese troops against Taiping rebels. Miao troops rebelled with Sanbao as their base and Long Caigui as their leader, and joined Yu Zhengji to take Guzhou :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``8-4-1856``: Miao troops took walled towns of Shengbing and Kaili. At Kaili, Chinese beseiged within the city walls resorted to cannibalism to survive :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``8-23-1856``: Yu Zhengji and Long Caigui took Guzhou. Chinese cannibalism at Guizhou is reported :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``8-30-1856``: Lo Guangming takes prefectural Duyun. Chinese cannibalism at Guizhou is reported :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``9-11-1856``: Miao took the subprefectural Qingjiang and controlled the area until 1869 :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``9-27-1856``: Miao took the subprefectural Taigong and controlled the area until 1870 :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-1856``: November, Chinese retook Duyun :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``12-1856``: December, Remnants of Red Signals are wiped out by Chinese :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``2-24-1857``: Xiaoshun,Chinese commander-in-chief of Guizhou, committed suicide over desperate situation in Dushan. Between 1857 and 1867, there was a transition of 10 commanders-in-chief :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``10-1857``: October, Jiang Yingfang, a master martial artist Miao and leader of the Heavenly Peace sect, rebelled :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``1-1858``: January, He Kuanyi led the White Signals (Baihao) to rebel in northern Guizhou. They took Yingwuxi. :cite:`1994:jenks`
* ``2-2-1858``: He Kuanyi took Yingjiang :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``3-1858``: March, Yellow Signals began their uprising: Yang Hefeng at Yuxi, He Jipan at Zhuoshui and Hu Heier at Ganxi. A Miao, Her Desheng (He Desheng) was the most capable military leader involved in the Yellow Signal. :cite:`1994:jenks`
* ``3-3-1858``: Lo Guangming took Maha and the Miao controlled it until 1868. With Maha taken, the southeastern region of Guizhou, the heartland of the Miao, is protected by all the Miao controlled periphery cities :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``10-5-1858``: Miao took Zhengyaun :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Xiong Tai declared himself 'Lord of the Sky' :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Xiong Tai started rebellion in Tonkin. Xiong Tai is recorded as a 'madman'. His followers were composed of predominantly White Hmong, and he was met with opposition by some Black Hmong. His palace was called, 'Long Vei', Seat of the Dragon, and located at the mountain of Tang Chang :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``5-25-1862``: Jiang Yingfang took the administrative seat of Tianzhu. He became known as King Pacifier (wang pingding). Three months later, Hunan troops retook Tianzhu, captured Jiang Yingfang in October and executed him :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Taiping rebellion in China was resolved. This rebellion freed up resources for China to deal with Miao rebellion :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* French annexation of Cochin China (southern Vietnam) and position of protectorate over Cambodia began :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* (Summer) 1865, 10,000 Miao deaths were reported in the Dading prefecture from illness, war and diseases :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Liu Yuezhao, Sichuan-backed, is charged to lead Chinese against Miao rebellions in northern Guizhou. :cite:`1994:jenks`
* Tang Joing, a Qing commander, began to incorporate captured Miao rebels into his army against uncaptured Miao rebels :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Liu Yuezhao was governor of Yunnan and Guizhou (1868) :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* (Spring), Liu Yuezhao took Suiyang from rebel leader Wu Yuanbiao and his 4,000 troops and 6,000 inhabitants of Suiyang :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Zhaochen was appointed by Hunan to lead Hunan troops in Guizhou against Miao. Three columns of Hunan forces were to be used against the Miao. The first of 5,000 men, lead by Zhaochen was based in Zhenyuan. The second, 4,000 men under Li Yuandu in Tongren. The third, 10,000 men under Zhou Hongyin at Tianzhu. This force of Hunan soilders were to pacify systematically rebel forces in eastern Guizhou. Some of the techniques used by the Chinese military leaders included strong troop discipline (no rape, looting, murdering) and empowering natives as officials so as to both hold the conquered areas and prevent further uprisings :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* April, Commander Doudart de Lagree and Francis Granier charted Mekong for France utilization in trade and expedition. Charting the Mekong led to Laos :cite:`2005:lee,1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-1867``: June, Cen Yuying took Thao Xingchun's Bije and Zhenxiong bases :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-1867``: November, Zhaochen was impeached by Hunan governor for ineffective column approach to extinguishing Miao rebellion :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* (Autumn), Tang Jiong acquired British merchant-adventurer Williman Mensy as a military consultant. :cite:`1994:jenks`
* ``1-1868``: January, Xi Baotian was appointed by the govenor of Hunan to take Zhaochen's command over Hunan troops against the Miao rebels. He had 10,000 new troops with this assignment. By the end of January, Xi Baotian and Li Yuandi took Jingzhuyuan and defeated the Yellow and White Signals :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``4-1868``: April, Sichuan sent 6,900 troops with Tiang Jiong to aid Guizhou against Miao rebels :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``5-1868``: May, Tiang Jiong and Li Yuandu took White Signal stronghold at Biandaoshui. 7,000 rebels surrendered as 1,000 rebels were killed. Miao bases at Zhenyuan, Qingjian and Shibing were also captured. :cite:`1994:jenks`
* ``8-1868``: August, White and Yellow Singal bases at Jiaolinsi, Yuhuashan, Da Jiaodingshang, Xao Jiaodingshang and Shangdaping were all captured. During this campaign, all significant White and Yellow Signal leaders were captured or killed. Northeastern Guizhou was pacified by the Chinese Hunan-Sichuan troops. Success of Chinese commander Tang Jiong was credited to his ability to incorporate and use captured Han and Miao rebels to fight on his side--albeit, Han and Sichuan troops never harmoniously cooperated against the rebels. With the Chinese victory over Han Signals, the focus turned on the Miao in the southeast, and to take the stronghold of Taigong :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``4-1869``: April, Miao leader Bao Dadu ambushed and killed half of Huang Runchuang's troops including Huang (a subordinate of Xi Baotian) :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``8-1869``: August, Miao leader Jin Gan'gan took Duyun and acquired high-technology weapons from Chinese troops :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Tang Jiong was dismissed by Sichuan. Zhou Dawu replaced Tang Jiong and led with an additional Sichuan 5,900 new troops :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``8-1870``: August, Tang Jiong withdrew his troops from advancement after his repeated failed attempts to have military supplies replenished :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``11-12-1870``: Xi Baotian captured strategic Miao town, Taigong, and Miao resistance began to crumble :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``12-1870``: December, Miao leader, Yan Dawu, was captured :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Zhang Xiumei, great Miao leader of rebellion, was captured :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``5-28-1872``: Gao Her was captured at Leigongshan and executed :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* ``5-31-1872``: The Hui in southwest Guizhou were pacified as Xingyi was taken by the Chinese :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Chinese declared the official end of Miao rebellion. Reconstruction began as Miao are forced to assimilate into Chinese culture through requirements such as wearing only Chinese clothing, studying only Confucian thoughts, speaking only Chinese, etc… An estimated 4.9 million out of 7 million people were killed in the Miao rebellion. Property of 25,000,000 taels of silver was additionally lost to Guizhou, while 80,000,000 taels of silver were spent in pacifying the Miao rebellion :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Francis Granier beheaded Black Flag bandits in Tonkin :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Xiong Tai is killed by Chinese assassins hired by his father-in-law after killing his wife. One of Xiong Tai's adopted son, Ly Tsan Tsao, replaced Xiong Tai as ruler at Yen Minh. Ly Tsan Tsao would be defeated and moved to Meo Vac; Ly Tsan Tsao would be killed at Xin Cai while leading attacks against enemies coming from China :cite:`2005:lee`.
* French annexation of Tonkin (north Vietnam) and Annam (middle Vietnam) :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* (1884--1885) Sino-French War Its underlying cause was the French desire for control of the Red River, which linked Hanoi to the resource-wealthy Yunnan province in China.
* Xiong Mi Chang is born at Si Phai in Tonkin :cite:`2005:lee`.
* France gained control of Kingdom of Luang Prabang from Siam. Auguste Paive is said to rescue King Unkham from burning palace during invasion by White Tai invasion, lead by Deo Van Tri :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Ly Foung was born to Ly Dra Pao, his father, in the Nong Het area :cite:`2005:lee`.
* France assumed rule over Laos with 'gunboat policy' :cite:`2005:lee,1999:hamilton`.
* During this time, Hmongs in northern Laos suffered taxation by the French imperialists and Laotion middlemen. The 3 Kiatong Hmongs in the Nong Het area organized an ambush against the much despised Laotion middlemen tax collectors. As a result, French-Hmong negotiations began and a new political structure of Hmong villages results. Under the new political structure, the position of Tasseng (canton administrator) had two important authority: 1) collect taxes from their own people and 2) autonomy over Hmong village administration. Efficacy of Tasseng power and authority forever changed Hmong preference for dealing with Westerners over Laotions :cite:`2000:lee`. More precise reason for revolt was French colonial authority allowed tax payment in opium that was far below market value. Franco-Lao authority sent 'garde indigne' to intimidate Hmong, which was attacked by Hmong forces at Ban Khang Phanieng. The Hmong even attacked the capital of Xieng Khouang, forcing the French to call for an armistice and negotiations :cite:`2005:lee`. Another one of Xiong Tai's adopted son, Ly Tsan Pao, attempted to maintain leadership in his name. Due to ineffectiveness, however, Xiong Tai's movement came to an end :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Boxer Rebellion.
* It was estimated by French that Hmong made up 30% of the population in Xieng Khouang province in Laos. :cite:`2005:lee`
