1900 to 1918 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``shikai``
* ``sun``
* ``system``
* ``attack chan``
* ``secretary lo``
* ``chang release``
* ``chang return``
* ``followers report``
* ``alphabet hmong``
* ``chang lin``

Events
------

* Lo PaSy was killed by his bodyguard, Zong Cher Yang, and was buried at Yeng Pha :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Opium is one third of all French colonial revenues :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Paid French staff administering Laos is recorded at 72 and said to be the 'smallest anywhere in the French empire.' :cite:`2005:lee`
* Hmong, led by Ly clan, of Nong Khaiw rose up in protest against tax extortions by Lao officials. Lao officials charged 4 kips for each individual, while the French charged only 1 kip per individual. When Hmong refused to pay the taxes, the French formed armed response. The Hmong also took up arms and were led by Ly Tsong Na. Ly Tsong Na's group is recorded to kill 70--80 people at Cha Pha Ngoi. The French immediately called for peace, and the Hmong sent a representative from the Moua clan who was nominated by the French as Tasseng. Ly NhiaVu relocated to Long Hu, while Ly Tsong Na stayed. Ly Tsong Na was killed by Ly Joua Kao, who was promised by the French to be promoted to kaitong if he eliminated Ly Tsong Na. Ly Joua Kao would later be poisoned by French who also denied the existence of the deal :cite:`2005:lee`.
* A Hmong writing system based on Chinese character system was discovered (1906--1909) :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* Lo BliaYao volunteered to help aid French construct Colonial Route 7. Corvee constriptions of Hmong began. :cite:`2005:lee`
* Ly Foung became secretary of Lo BliaYao :cite:`2005:lee`.
* (1910--1912) Xiong Mi Chang started rebellion in northeastern Tonkin at Haigiang province. His leadership is legitimized by the support of Ly Tsan Pao :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``9-17-1910``: French officer, Lieutenant Leonard, stationed at Dong Van, reported a Hmong madman at Meo Vac stirring and attracting public attention. Leonard reported that people denied of an uprising or manifestation of a Hmong king. Xiong Mi Chang accompanied Lt. Leonard back to Dong Van as a token of good intention. Xiong Mi Chang is held for nearly 3 months :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-28-1910``: Xiong Mi Chang is released from French detention.
* Zhong Hua Min Guo (Meej Kuj)
* ``2-9-1911``: As reported by Tai authority, Xiong Mi Chang proclaimed himself as 'king of the mountains' and has 600-700 armed followers. The construction of trenches and conscription is recorded :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-11-1911``: Lt. Leonard investigated Tai claims about Xiong Mi Chang at Nga-Ban-Sui. He observed 400 Hmong with their hair flowing down and armed. Lt. Leonard asked them their grievances, and they responded they no longer wanted to be under the rule of Tho chiefs, although they did not specify who they wanted to be ruled under :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-12-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang and followers are reported to kill a Yao :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-15-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang is recorded to hand out titles to followers, and also recorded constructing military and civil administration for his kingdom :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-25-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang followers constructed a trench at Chang Poung. Hmong from China are recorded to arrive in Tonkin to participate in rebellion. Xiong Mi Kay, related to Xiong Mi Chang and who would also become his secretary for his literacy in Chinese, arrived from China :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-26-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang's generals, Xiong Chinh Minh and Vang Van Sinh, led groups of 200 and 800 simultaneously attacking Tho village of Vinh Thon and market of Mo Rue, respectively. Other groups attacked at San Co Ping and Lung Cam. Former Chinese posts at Ma-lin and Hou-ting also attaked :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-27-1911``: French prepared military response to Xiong Mi Chang rebellion with 1 company of Tokinense tirailleurs and one section of Legionnaires. French also convened with loyalist Hmong at Dong Van :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-28-1911``: Hmong rebels attacked Yen Minh and were repelled by French Sergent Alessandri. Vang Van Sinh and Vang Seu led Hmong of Duong Thuong attacked Muong Cha and Black Hmong of Lung Chung :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``3-1911``: French Captain Cot started peace settlement negotiations with Xiong Mi Chang at Meo Vac, the administrative capital of the king. Xiong Mi Chang is reported by locals as living in the mountains. Without meeting Xiong Mi Chang, the French asked the locals to send a message to Xiong Mi Chang promising safety if he surrendered. :cite:`2005:lee`
* ``3-3-1911``: Hmong rebels cross over from Tonkin into China and attacked at Ma Chang and Ma Leu :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``3-21-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang's emissary returned without a response :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``3-22-1911``: Captain Cot sought and found Xiong Mi Chang's hideout. Captain Cot captures Xiong Mi Chang's father, mother, and sister :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``4-10-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang's rebellion effectively ended. Casualties suffered were 90, 52 of whom were Hmong, and 29 of whom were Tho. Xiong Mi Chang is reported to be taking refuge in Na Sin in China :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``7-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang gained White Hmong followers while in China and prepare for new attacks :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``8-2-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang attacked Ma Chan in China :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``8-9-1911``: Xiong Mi Chang returned to his birthplace in Tonkin at Si Phai. More activity reported in Meo Vac following Xiong Mi Chang's return :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``8-15-1911``: Chinese proposed to French a joint attack against Xiong Mi Chang in both Chinese (Ma Chan) and French (Dong Van) territories. The French rejected the offer and were convinced negotiations were useless at this point. More troops were called upon by French to end rebellion :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``9-11-1911``: French loyalist chiefs from Chang and Vang clans were sent to assess and negotiate Xiong Mi Chang's surrender :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``9-16-1911``: Chinese fail to capture Xiong Mi Chang at Ma Lin :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``10-4-1911``: A group of 300 Hmong rebels attack Chinese at Ma Lin. They later fled into Tonkin with the Chinese persuing :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-1911``: Hmong from Dong Van crossed into China with Chinese permission to ambush Xiong Mi Chang. Xiong Mi Chang's two wives and infant son died in this fight. Xiong Mi Chang's son was considered 'true king', and after his death, the rebellion grew ever more weak :cite:`2005:lee`.
* A French officer named d'Ollone documented the use of Chinese character logographic writing with some modifications/additions for a Hmong dialect in Sichuan :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* Sun Yat Sen
* ``1-1912``: Xiong Mi Kay was captured and decapitated by Chinese. Xiong Mi Chang sent surrender letter to authorities at Dong Van. The French only promised to spare Xiong Mi Chang's life :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``4-22-1912``: Xiong Mi Chang is captured after informant told of his nightly visits to his relatives at Ma Pang. Colonel Bonifacy, Commander of the Third Military Region, led a Peace Tribunal to interrogate Xiong Mi Chang. :cite:`2005:lee`
* ``5-2-1913``: Xiong Mi Chang is sentenced to work at l'Ile de la Table by the Governor General of Indochina. :cite:`2005:lee`
* Lo BliaYao is noted to have 15 crates of silver and gold, which he showed to a French military officer offering to buy his horse for 400 piastres :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-1914``: Xiong Mi Chang arrived at l'Ile de la Table :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-1914``: Xiong Mi Chang is brought back to Quang Yen :cite:`2005:lee`.
* (1912--1916) Yuan Shikai
* Savina Romanized Alphabet for Hmong language was created (before 1917) :cite:`1990:smalley`.
