1918 to 1930 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``chiang``
* ``attack bien``
* ``construction colonial``
* ``gautier``
* ``boast hmong``
* ``cpt``
* ``french take``
* ``bounty hunters``
* ``attack tai``
* ``ger``

Events
------

* (1918--1921) Pa Chay Vue's Chao Fa (Prince of the Sky) battled with the French. Paj Chai's Chao Fa originally were a military movement against the Black Thai of Northwest Vietnam. However, when the French were notified of a 'rebellion' against the French, French troops were sent after the Chao Fa. This military mobilization organized against the Chao Fa was the largest military expedition up to this point in Laos :cite:`2000:lee`. The rebellion led by Pa Chay was called 'La Guerre du Fou' (the War of the Madman) and also known as the Madman's Rebellion or Pa Chay's War :cite:`2005:lee`. The French characterize Pa Chay as an epileptic and sorcerer :cite:`2005:lee`. The rebellion started in Tonkin near Dien Bien Phu :cite:`2005:lee`. 1920: Pa Chay's Chao Fa are first recorded to go against French :cite:`1999:hamilton`. 11/17/1921: Pa Chay was assassinated by the Khmu at Paj Chay's hideout in Muoug Hep, Luang Prabang. At Nong Het, the French staged a bloody show by decapitating the heads of Chao Fa leaders in front of a forced Hmong crowd. Futhermore, the Hmongs were forced by the French to pay a total of 375 kilograms of silver in compensation for every Laotion or Vietnamese killed in the Chao Fa war. The French were not the only ones to gain from this war, Hmong allies of the French who helped to subdue the Chao Fa also gained, namely, Lo Blia Yao :cite:`2000:lee`.
* Ly Foung abducted and married Lo BliaYao's daughter.
* ``1-1918``: On the Chinese frontier at Muong Tinh, a Hmong man announced a miraculous recovery after paralysis for several years. He was arrested by the local Chinese official in fear of this miracle inspiring a rebellion. When Hmong leaders failed to petition for his release, they gathered a force to attack but the Chinese official had already abandoned his post :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``2-8-1918``: Hmong rebels capture Dong Xuong. The Chinese eventually pushed the Hmong into Tonkin. In Tokin, Hmong Chinese and Hmong Tokinese joined forces and declared independence :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``6-11-1918``: Arrival of Hmong king heard in Thuan district :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``6-17-1918``: Hmong attacked Tai in Muong Dong region :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``10-30-1918``: Pa Chay led Hmong at Dien Bien Phu in revolt :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``11-11-1918``: Two Hmong chiefs involved in rebellion captured by French :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-5-1918``: French delegation sent to negotiate with Pa Chay ambushed :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-12-1918``: Pa Chay troops attacked Ban Nam Ngham and secured the area as a refuge for their families. :cite:`2005:lee`
* ``12-14-1918``: Hmong inspired by Pa Chay burned the village of Le Pe in Lao Cai province :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-27-1918``: Pa Chay was reported to be taking refuge at Long He with Cam Xu, a self-proclaimed king :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-30-1918``: Hmong attacked Bien Lieu :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-2-1919``: Gautier attacked Hmong at Ban Pu Veng, killing 20 Hmong. Gautier started to move towards Long He. :cite:`2005:lee`
* ``1-19-1919``: Gautier reached Long He and forced Cam Xu and Pa Chay in different directions :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``7-1919``: Pa Chay entered into Xieng Khouang province in Laos to recruit more followers :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``9-12-1919``: Followers of Pa Chay preemptively attacked French commissioner of Luang Prabang, Barrelle, who was en route to attack the Hmong :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``11-5-1919``: Hmong overran French post at Luang Prabang :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``11-14-1919``: French Commandant Dorey ordered a ban on exportation of rice and livestock :cite:`2005:lee`.
* (1920--1935) Lo BliaYao, son of King Lo PaSy, began leadership of Hmongs as Tasseng :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* In China, Red Miao encroached on Black Miao homeland in eastern Guizhou. The government of China stepped in and removed the Red Miao from Black Miao territory :cite:`1994:jenks`.
* Nong Het region boasted 30,000 Hmong :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-1920``: After a failed assassination by Lo Shong Ger, Lo BliaYao returned from Vietnam with French forces led by Henri Roux :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``3-1920``: Lo BliaYao achieved victory against Hmong rebels. He sentenced rebels to imprisonment, executions, and fines. Lo Shong Ger and those who escaped are lured back. Long Shong Ger was sent to Xieng Khoaung and died en route ingesting poison; his followers were publicly executed at Nong Het. All three sons of Long Shong Ger, Chai Vang, Soua Ger, and Toua Zeng, were also publicly executed :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-19-1920``: Commandant Dorey resumes chase after Pa Chay :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-20-1920``: Commandant Dorey launched two-pronged attack to take Sung Quan Lao Van. Captain Limousine attacked between Nam Heup and Nam Bong, while Captain Pesquidous attacked east of Nam Bong. Cpt. Pesquidous encountered Hmong attack two kilometers from Phya Cham. Dorey ordered Hmong poppy fields to be burned along with the rest of the village. Dorey also approved for animals to be slaughtered as provision for the colonial troops, and ordered the systematic evacuation of villages :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-24-1920``: Cpt. Pesquidous overpowered Hmong and forced them to Phya Cham, where another battle ensued called, 'Affairs of Phya Cham'. The French eventually broke through Hmong defenses and the Hmong fled :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-26-1920``: Cpt. Pesquidous took control of Lao Yang Lao Tso and Tian Tao :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-28-1920``: Cpt. Pesquidous destroyed Lao Mang and Lao Ly :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-29-1920``: Cpt. Pesquidous began take over of Ba Lac and Sac Phya :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-30-1920``: Cpt. Limousine reached and took Phu Nhi with negligible attacks by Hmong :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-4-1921``: The last two villages leading to Sung Quan Lao Van, Ta Deng and Ban Chie, were taken by French troops :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-6-1921``: Hmong chief, Song Quan Sung, declared allegiance to French and was accepted. Losing battles and Hmong alliances with French marked the turning point for Pa Chay :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-9-1921``: Cpt. Limousine and Cpt. Pesquidous troops joined to attack Sung Quan Lao Van :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-11-1921``: French took Sung Quan Lao Van :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``1-12-1921``: Cpt. Pesquidous was ordered to stay while Cpt. Limousine pursued Hmong rebels toward Muong Heup. :cite:`2005:lee`
* ``3-1921``: Madman's Rebellion ended :cite:`2005:lee`. French created 8 tasseng positions to be held by Hmong after rebellion. Tassengs were allowed to submit taxes directly to French bypassing naikong. French also planned to create schools to educate sons of Hmong chiefs :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``3-21-1921``: French forces sent to quell rebellion return back to former posts :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Pollard script for Flowery Miao is used to publish Gospel of Mark :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``11-22-1922``: Pa Chay is killed by bounty hunters :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Construction of Colonial Route 7 was finished :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Ly Foung resigns from secretary position with Lo Blia Yao :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Ly Foung petitioned French on behalf of Green Hmong for their own tasseng position. Nong Het is split into Phak Boun and Keng Khoai, with Joua Kao Ku and Lo Blia Yao as the respective tassengs. Ly Foung became secretary of Joua Kao Ku :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Lo Blia Yao protested the split of Nong Het by alleging Ly Foung was the architect behind uprising in the War of the Madman, a murderer, and planning to oust Joua Kao Ku of the tasseng position for himself. :cite:`2005:lee`
* Tsong Tou Lo, son of Lo BliaYao, took over his father's position as tasseng :cite:`2005:lee`.
* ``12-1925``: French investigated Ly Foung's involvement with the death of Lia Nao Vang :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Ly Foung presented himself in front of French Commissioner Barthelemy in Xieng Khouang to address charges made by Lo Blia Yao. He was set free and offered an apology when none of the charges were found valid :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Chiang Kai-Shek
* Ly Foung became tasseng over Phak Boun :cite:`2005:lee`.
* Shong Lue Yang (Soob Lwj Yaj) was born as Shoua Yang :cite:`1990:smalley`.
