1961 to 1976 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``tom``
* ``nixon elect``
* ``lima``
* ``air``
* ``assasinated``
* ``border close``
* ``minh die``
* ``evacuate thailand``
* ``live montana``
* ``agree bomb``

Events
------

* May, Geneva Conferences on Laos open under assumption of cease-fire :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* In the late 1960's, the Pathet Lao Alphabet writing system was created for Hmong people :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* In the late 1960's, the Whitelock Thai-based Alphabet writing system for the Hmong language was created :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``1-6-1961``: Krushchev declared Soviet support for wars of national liberation in the face of incoming President Kennedy :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-9-1961``: Kong Le, Pathet Lao and NVA stopped General Phoumi's attempt to retake PDJ. PDJ battles against Hmong and Royal Lao by the NVA , Kong Le and Pathet Lao broke out :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-17-1961``: Bay of Pigs Invasion failed. Kennedy ordered covert White Star advisors in Laos to operate overtly in a counter-Khrushchev move. This action violated the Geneva Accords openly :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-5-1961``: Summit in Vienna between Kennedy and Khrushchev :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* North Vietnam denied the presence of NVA troops in Laos and did not withdrew any forces, while Americans withdrew 666 military men. By the end of August, there were 10,000 NVA in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* US realized the threat of NVA presence in Laos and resorted to the Third Option--which is counterinsurgency and guerrilla warfare. Vang Pao moved his headquarter from Pha Khao to Long Chieng :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-23-1962``: US pulled out White Star advisors to show good faith in Geneva Conference :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-23-1962``: July, Geneva Accords reaffirmed Laos as a neutral state and prohibited foreign bases or troops. Kennedy negotiators in Geneva stated a Laos based on coalition government would emerge. General Phoumi would have to step down and Chao Souvanna Phouma would step into the leadership position of this new Laos. Forrestal and Sullivan, two of the negotiators, arrived in Laos to attempt to unite Vang Pao and Kong Le, which turns out unsuccessful. They observed the Vang Pao troop as being ill-equipped to fight their enemy :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1962``: August, NVA attacked Ban Ban area and as 6,000 Lao, Kmhmu and Hmong flee, they are caught, slaughtered and raped :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-1962``: October, Cuban Missile Crisis :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-7-1962``: Deadline for withdrawal of all foreign troops from Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Shong Lue Yang fled from Tham Ha to Fi Kha when communist troops attempt to arrest him. He later sent a delegation to get protection from Vang Pao :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``4-1963``: April, Pathet Lao attacked Kong Le and forced Kong Le from Khang Khay :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-12-1963``: State Department responded to Kong Le defeat by stepping up supply :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-1963``: November, JFK is assassinated. LBJ became President. Over 16,000 US military personnel remained in Laos.
* ``11-3-1963``: South Vietnamese Premier Diem was assassinated :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao occupied PDJ :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Vang Pao was promoted to General in the Royal Lao Army. 30,000 Hmongs were involved at this time with the fight against the NVA--each being paid 10 cents per day along with the 'promise' of being taken care by the US government :cite:`2000:lee`.
* Shong Lue Yang fled back to Tham Ha from Fi Kha after communist attack :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``6-7-1964``: NVA, Kong Le and Pathet took Padong stronghold. Hmongs surviving the defeat moved to Yat Mo and then Pha Khao :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-4-1964``: Gulf of Tonkin incident where North Vietnanmese shoot US destroyer, Maddox, led to retaliation by President Johnson to issue airstrikes against the North Vietnamese :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-7-1964``: Gulf of Tonkin Resolution is passed and gave Johnson unlimited power to handle Southeast Asia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-1964``: Shong Lue Yang moved to Kiaw Boua :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``10-1964``: October, China exploded its first atomic bomb. Krushchev is ousted and replaced by Brezhnev and Kosygin :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-1964``: December, President Johnson is reelected. Operation Barrel Roll is launched as fighter jets in Thailand fly to bomb nothern Lao in support of the Hmongs :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Mao Zedong began the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Air Force at Udorn Air Base in Thailand was activated to provide air support in secret fights :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-2-1965``: Operation Rolling Thunder launched to bomb North Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-1965``: Shong Lue Yang introduced Second Stage Reduced Version of Pahawh Hmong and Pahawh Khmu :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* Hmong New Year, Vang Pao took a Laotion wife, Mae La, to prove his love for the Laotions and Laos. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* Shong Lue Yang is detained at Long Cheng :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``2-17-1966``: Vang Pao's third military base, Na Khang, is taken by NVA and Pathet Lao troops. Prior to the defeat, Vang Pao was shot in the arm by enemy fire and medevacked to Thailand for surgery. By this time, Vang Pao became the undisputed Hmong leader in Indochina, overshadowing Lyfoung Touby. With Vang Pao disabled in Thailand, a coup against him occurred via the efforts of Ly clan members in Long Chieng. Lyfoung Touby was accused of scheming the coup, however, his daughters insist an official investigation ensue to clear their father of this charge :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-16-1966``: Vang Pao's military success showed as he pushed NVA troops beyond Nam Bac, an area 45 miles from the North Vietnamese border :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Vang Pao is a general by this time. Ly Lue and Vang Toua earned their wings as Chaophakaow. Vang Toua is killed in action shortly after taking to the skies. Hmong irregular forces are known as Special Guerrilla Units (SGUs) and later as Groupes Mobiles (GM). By this time, figures estimate that the 20,000 indigenous troops were paid $0.10 per day per person ($2,000 total per day) or $60,000 per month. Auto Defense de Choc (ADC) and Auto Defense Ordinaire (ADO) forces, organized and funded by the Royal Lao government, received weapons and salaries of $2-3 per month or 1,000-2,000 kips per month. During time, the US Department of Defense stepped up involvement with military personnel and supply into Laos. The State Department's counterinsurgency efforts and authority began to diminish :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* US installed top-secret equipment atop Phou Pha Thi in Laos for 24-7, all-weather precision bombing against targets in north Loas and North Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-2-1967``: Laung Prabang airfield is destroyed by the communist troop :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-15-1967``: Shong Lue Yang is jailed for contact with followers of Chao Fa in communist-controlled area :cite:`1990:smalley,1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-21-1967``: 50,000 protestors demonstrated against the Vietnam War and LBJ at the Pentagon :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-1967``: November, Bertrand Russell and his International War Crimes Tribunal opened their second session :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* North Koreans captured USS Pueblo :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-1-1968``: Hanoi agreed to talk with the US if all bombings stopped. Bombing had stopped as previously agreed on both side due to the Tet New Year. Delay of bombing was to buy Hanoi time to move weapons and troops into position to take over US Air Force base in Phou Pha Thi :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-31-1968``: General Giap launched Tet Offensive throughout South Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-18-1968``: Hmongs obtained detail NVA plans to take Phou Pha Thi :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-10-1968``: Phou Pha Thi was attacked by NVA and taken later. American and Hmong versions of the fall of Phou Pha Thi differed :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-1-1968``: General Vang Pao secretly visited Johnson White House officials, including Special Assistant to the President, Walt Rostow :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-31-1968``: LBJ ordered a complete halt to all air, naval and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-5-1968``: Nixon was elected President :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-14-1968``: LBJ wrote thank you letter to General Vang Pao and for the Hmong handcrafted rifle :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-1968``: December, Captain Fred Walker left Laos assignment for Thailand assignment. General Vang Pao gave Walker a 4 pound silver necklace :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Senator William Fulbright revealed that the CIA ran military operations in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Vang Pao proclaimed that Hmongs have earned the right to be called Hmongs and no longer Meo :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-16-1969``: In Paris, US and North Vietnam agreed on the shape of the negotiating table to be round. Henry A. Kissinger took the place of Averall Harriman under the Nixon Administration :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-1969``: March, In operation Menu, Nixon covertly approved the bombing of Cambodia. Cambodia is believed to be a place of sanctuaries for the NVA :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-1-1969``: Na Khang, the Alamo, fell. Long Chieng and Bouam Loung (held by Moua Cher Pao) remained among the few remaining centers of importance :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-23-1969``: Countering the loss of Na Khang, General Vang Pao coordinated US Air supported fight against the NVA at PDJ :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-1969``: May, Nixon proposed NVA and US personnel out of South Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-8-1969``: Nixon annouced unilateral withdrawal of 25,000 troops from South Vietnam. Months later, a 35,000 troop withdrawal followed. These actions were the beggning of the de-Americanization or Vietnamization of Southeast Asia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-24-1969``: NVA captured Muong Soui, a strategic military site and airfield for the Royal Lao troops :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-1-1969``: General Vang Pao ordered air-supported fight to retake Muong Soui. Ly Lue was shot down and killed. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``8-1969``: August, General Vang Pao launched Operation About Face to retake PDJ :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-12-1969``: General Vang Pao succeeded in taking Xieng Khouang and Lima Lima airfield :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-13-1969``: Ho Chi Minh died :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-28-1969``: Muong Soui was taken by General Vang Pao troops :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-1969``: October, Senator Stuart Symington conducted secret hearing in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-20-1969``: Senator Stuart Symington opened secret hearings on Laos. Under questioning of Symington, Senator JW Fulbright and Roland A. Paul maintained that the US had no moral commitment to Laos, the Lao Royal government or Vang Pao. US efforts in Laos were a commitment to USSR in the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement of keeping Laos a neutral country :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia is overthrowned by General Lon Nol :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* In the early 1970's, the Whitelock Lao-based Alphabet writing system for the Hmong language was created :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* n the early 1970's, so-called Anonymous Writing System for the Hmong language was created :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``1-23-1970``: Ambassador Godley to Laos requested B-52 strikes :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-1970``: February, B-52 began to be used in Laos. Kissinger conducted secret talks with North Vietnamese in Paris :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-13-1970``: Souvanna Phouma formally requested B-52 strikes :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-16-1970``: NVA and Pathet Lao drove their way to PDJ. Kissinger recommended Nixon to use B-52 if NVA and Pathet Lao advance beyond Muong Soui :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-17-1970``: 3 B-52's strike NVA and Pathet Lao troops in northern Laos and PDJ area as ordered by Nixon :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-21-1970``: General Vang Pao ordered Lima Lima and PDJ to be abandoned temporarily. Henry Kissinger prepared for another secret meeting with the Le Duc Tho of North Vietnamese in Paris :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-25-1970``: Senators Mathias, Mansfield, Gore, Symington, Cooper and Percy attacked Kissinger and Nixon secret policies in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-27-1970``: Nixon and Kissinger prepared White House statement on US activities in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-6-1970``: Nixon revealed for the first time, US presence in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-16-1970``: Round two of Kissinger-Le Duc Tho meeting began :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-18-1970``: A National Assembly vote removed Prince Norodom Sihanouk as head of state, and General Lon Nol replaced the prince :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-19-1970``: Thai troops helped Hmongs to defend Long Chieng :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-1-1970``: NVA troops withdrew from Long Chieng's Skyline :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-4-1970``: Third Kissinger-Le Duc Tho meeting. The US was blamed for the agression and war :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-30-1970``: Nixon explained how Vietnamization will be required to eliminate communist sanctuaries in Cambodia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-1970``: May, Fighther pilot, Vang Seng was shot down in air mission :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-5-1970``: Ohio National Guardsmen killed four youths in an antiwar demonstration :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-9-1970``: 75,000 to 100,000 war protesters demonstrated in front of the White House :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1970``: Shong Lue Yang finished Third Stage Reduced Version of Pahawh Hmong :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``9-1970``: September, McGovern-Hatfield amendment, which set December 31,1971 as the date to withdraw US troops completely, is defeated :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-8-1970``: Shong Lue Yang is rescued from prison and tkane to Nam Chia :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``11-20-1970``: Mission ordered by White House to retrieve US POWs :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Fall, Hmong demoralization of heavy losses and disillusionment of US withdrawal suggested the near collapse of the Hmong. It is estimated most Hmong families were reduced to a surviving male of 13 years :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-21-1971``: Shong Lue Yang finished Pahawh Hmong Final Version.
* ``2-1971``: February, Nixon met Mao Zedong of China :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-1971``: February, Pathet Lao held secret meeting at Vien Sai in the Sam Neua Province, and US resignaled their bold commitment to withdrawal. In this meeting, a central governing body of 7 politburo men were installed. The Lao People's Party became the Lao People's Revolutionary Party, and communist strategy for ultimate takeover of Laos began. Lao leaders included Prince Souphanouvong and the strongest leadership, Kaysone Phomvihane :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-8-1971``: Operation Lam Son 719 led South Vietnam to cross into Laos and fight North Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-14-1971``: Valentine's Day Massacre occurred when NVA and Pathet Lao attacked Long Chieng :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-15-1971``: Shong Lue Yang is assasinated :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``3-1971``: March, Operation Lam Son 719 began to fail as South Vietnamese moved out of Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-15-1971``: General Vang Pao's troop took enemy positions at Skyline and Phou Pha Xai mountain.
* ``5-20-1971``: NVA troops launched attack on Bouam Loung, site where Moua Cher Pao swore with his troops in a "drinking of the water" ceremony would never abandon this site. Moua Cher Pao's site is helped by new FAG technology called "offset beacon bombing," where aircraft could lock onto target without visual contact. By the end of May, NVA troops ceased significant efforts to attempt to overtake Bouam Loung :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-1971``: June, Senate passed Mansfield amendment, which called for the President to widthdraw all forces from Southeast Asia provided that American POWs are released by North Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-22-1971``: Mansfield amendment was passed, which stated for the President to withdraw all US troops if Hanoi released US POWs :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-26-1971``: Le Duc Tho and Kissinger met secretly in Paris. Le Duc Tho agreed to release all US POWs on the day of US withdrawal and with the US to dismantled the South Vietnam Thieu government. Le Duc Tho also demanded war reparations and suggested an assassination of Thieu :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-1971``: July, Kissinger met with Chou En Lai and Mao Zedong as a primer for 1972 Nixon-Zedong meeting. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``7-1971``: July, Jane Fonda arrived to act in the theatre of anti-war propaganda. Her presence with NVA anit-aircraft gunners and plea for humane treatment of US POWs were coordinated earlier by North Vietnam in Paris :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-1-1971``: July, Beginning in July, significant US troops and supply withdrawal would be realized. King Savang Vatthana and Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma ordered General Vang Pao to gain as much territory as possible before the July 1 deadline. General Vang Pao ordered phase 2 of his attempt to remove NVA from PDJ :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-5-1971``: US and USSR submitted text on banning biological and toxic weapons at the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-28-1971``: White House make clear they are running the show in Laos and not the CIA or State Department. All plans of operations were required to be submitted 10 days in advance of the operation :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-19-1971``: Two Russian MIGs are spotted over Ban Ban. Bouam Loung was later bombed :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-1971``: December, North Vietnam launched a massive attack against the Hmong base in northern Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-17-1971``: NVA launched full scale attack against firebase Tom Tom. Firebase Mustang and Hmong positions, Fox Bravo and Fox Echo, began to fall :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-20-1971``: Tom Tom and Mustang were overran :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-29-1971``: Long Chieng was on the eve of destruction by NVA. Ban Sornwas designated the new frontline resupply and redeployment center as Long Chieng fell :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-25-1972``: Nixon disclosed Kissinger's secret meeting with North Vietnam and commitment to total US withdrawal. He also accepted South Vietnam's President and Vice-President's resignations. The Viet Cong's politcal party, the National Liberation Front, are allowed to participate in South Vietnam's soon presidential elections. Nixon spoke also of spending billions of dollars in Indochina, which North Vietnam may reap, after the post-war years for reconstruction :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-26-1972``: North Vietnam rejected Nixon's proposals :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-10-1972``: Nixon signed Biological and Toxin Convention to ban such weapons, although no inspection apparatus is discussed. This treaty was one of many negotiating products of Kissinger-Russian meetings :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-20-1972``: Kissinger arrived in Moscow secretly. His meeting with Premier Leonid Brezhnev ensured US withdrawal with virtually no need for NVA withdrawal from Laos or South Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1-1972``: Le Duc Tho-Kissinger meeting in Paris, again, ensured US back out of Southeast Asia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-22-1972``: Nixon gained the Republican Presidential Candidate again. He later announced in July of the following year that there would be no more drafting. US troops numbered 47,000 by this time in South Vietnam. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``10-8-1972``: Le Duc Tho-Kissinger meeting in Paris strictly allowed only North Vietnam-US decisions in the removal of US troops and post-US involvement government set up in Southeast Asia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-14-1972``: Pathet Lao delegation headed to Vientiane to discuss the ending of the war in Laos. Cease-fire is set for January 23, 1973 :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-28-1972``: Hanoi approved the 10/8 Le Duc Tho-Kissinger accord :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-7-1972``: Nixon defeated McGovern for President :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-14-1972``: Nixon assured South Vietnam President Thieu retaliation if North Vietnam violated the accords. President Thieu instigated changes to Hanoi-Washington accord :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-13-1972``: Le Duc Tho canceled the accord due to Thieu changes. Nixons issued the "talk or else" policy to Le Duc Tho :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-18-1972``: Linebacker Two goes on for 11 days bombing Hanoi and strategic sites as part of Nixon's "or else" plan :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-28-1972``: Hanoi agreed to talk if bombings stopped :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-30-1972``: Linebacker Two stopped. 26 US aircraft shot down with 93 airmen, while 31 became captured. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``1-27-1973``: Cease-fire under the Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam was signed in Paris. Much was asked of South Vietnam and little of North Vietnam. US troops would completely withdraw in 60 days, while Hanoi's 160,000 troop in South Vietnam and 70,000 troops in Laos remained still :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-12-1973``: US POWs started to be released by North Vietnam. Their version of POW encampment differed from Jane Fonda. Fonda called the POWs hypocrites and liars :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-18-1973``: General Vang Pao married May Song Moua, a nurse, as his third wife :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-22-1973``: Peace agreement by the Lao called the Agreement on the Restoration of Peace and Reconciliation in Laos was signed. Royal capital Laung Prabang and administrative capital Vientiane were neutralized by having communists troops there as co-protectors. Cease-fire was effective 2/23 :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-1973``: April, Pathet Lao revised the Agreement as a strategic blueprint for more gains :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-14-1973``: The Vientiane Agreement was signed and signaled the collapse of the Royal Lao power :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-1973``: November, Congress passed the War Powers Act, rendering presidential retaliation for violation of peace treaties impossible :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* 40,000 North Vietnamese troops remain in Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-1974``: January, National Geographic article by W.E. Garrett's article appeared documenting Dr. Yang Dao and LyTeck Ly Nhia Vue's optimistic views for the new coalition government of Laos. LyTeck Ly Nhia Vue professed the Pathet Lao will appoint him over Yang Dao as Hmong leader to replace Vang Pao :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-4-1974``: June, The last Air America plane and US military personnel left Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1974``: August, a student-lead political protest stormed in Vientiane to promote their 18 point program, which called for eliminating all foreign sources of cultural vices :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1974``: August, Nixon is replaced by Ford as President due to Watergate Scandal :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1974``: August, Borders of Laos is closed. Mekong River became an Iron Curtain, and isolated the Laotian government as a gulag :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-1-1974``: Souvanna Phouma returned from France for medical treatment of a heart attack :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-31-1974``: Souvanna Phouma was recorded telling American professor Joesph Zasloff that Laos would not go communist :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* LyFong Touby met with General Vang Pao and investigated his options to defect. LyFong returned to Laos and was sent to Seminar Camp 5, where in 1979 he died :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* General Vang Pao was evacuated to Thailand :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* General Vang Pao was living in Montana :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-1975``: January, North Vietnam launched offensive against South Vietnam. Congress denied Ford's request for aid to South Vietnam :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-22-1975``: January, US ratified Biological and Toxin Convention :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``2-5-1975``: The Lao People's Revolutionary Army (LPRA) and NVA attacked the Royal Lao at Sala Phou Khoun. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``3-26-1975``: USSR ratified Biological and Toxin Convention :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-27-1975``: General Vang Pao troops protecting Sala Phou Khoun were under attack by LPRA troops :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-11-1975``: Again, General Vang Pao troops protecting Sala Phou Khoun are under attack by LPRA troops. Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma criticized General Vang Pao for protecting Sala Phou Khoun. Dr. Yang Dao toured communist countries seeking support for a Laos coalition government. General Vang Pao under criticism planned to take Lao Air Force :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-17-1975``: China-backed Pol Pot's communist Khmer Rouge took Cambodia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-30-1975``: Last US evacuation helicopter lifted off from the US Embassy in Saigon as the city is taken by the NVA. Saigon became Ho Chi Minh City and news of US-South Vietnam defeat reached Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-8-1975``: General Vang Pao at Long Chieng conducted a meeting among Hmong leaders regarding the decision to fight. They analyze the Paris Agreement of 1973 (Le Duc Tho-Kissinger), Agreement on the Restoration of Peace and Reconciliation of Laos, Vientiane Agreement, 18 point policy and a May 6th radio broadcast equivocally threatening the Hmong and other strategic military topics. By this time, Dr. Yang Dao is promoting Hmong integration with the LPRA government and was back from his communist country tour :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-9-1975``: NVA took Sala Phou Khoun. Discussion of evacuation turned imminent among the Hmong and General Vang Pao. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``5-10-1975``: General Vang Pao was issued an ultimatum by the CIA to evacuate. General Vang Pao and 12 Hmongs signed a treaty acknowledging previous American pledges and their own pledge to never return to Laos. Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma replaced General Vang Pao on this day as Commander of Military Region II :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-11-1975``: Hmong exodus from Laos began on C-47 planes. Dr. Yang Dao arrived at Long Chieng and fled as well.
* ``5-12-1975``: Prince Sisouk na Champassak sent the last artillery support of Long Chieng before fleeing Laos.
* ``5-14-1975``: General Vang Pao left Long Chieng to Phou Khang to bid farewell to Hmong villagers. He stopped at Muang Cha to board a plane to his final destination (Nam Phong) at Udorn Air Base. Some Hmongs, who no more planes would come for, but determined to follow General Vang Pao, set out on foot westward towards Ban Sorn. At Ban Sorn, some Hmongs determined going to Vientiane would be a much better option.
* ``5-15-1975``: General Vang Pao's replacement arrived, named, General Chao Manivong with LyFong Touby at Long Chieng .
* ``5-22-1975``: Souvanna Phouma ordered LyFong Touby to persauve Hmongs to stop exodus into Thailand. Touby made a speech at Ban Sorn to thousands of Hmong that they have no worry since they are the population, and the problem, referring to General Vang Pao and those who had gone to Thailand, were gone. His speech was closely monitored by Pathet Lao officials :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``5-28-1975``: 10,000 Hmongs in exodus at Hin Heup Bridge were opened fire upon by the Pathet Lao :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-1975``: June, US Air Foce was deactivated in Thailand :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-5-1975``: Radio Pathet Lao reported its version of Hin Heup Bridge Massacre, citing Hmong attacks and disruption. Sia Sivang was noted in this broadcast as General Vang Pao's henchman. Prince Sai Kham, the last prince of Xieng Khouang, crossed the Mekong River and took refuge in a Thai Buddha temple :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-9-1975``: Radio Pathet Lao announced Royal Lao Army officers request of Pathet Lao advisors. More propaganda against Hmong exodus was broadcast :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``6-10-1975``: Vientiane Domestic Service airs Order 904 which required all weapons to be returned to arsenal depots in their respective military regions :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-1975``: July, Former senior Royal Lao civilians and military were rounded up for seminar camps :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-30-1975``: Royal Lao-Pathet Lao coalition government stopped. Pathet Lao controlled Laos as USSR supply move in and a house-cleaning of the old governing officials begins :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-22-1975``: Lao-Thai border closed :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-1975``: September, the people of the traditional governing structure in Laos are eliminated :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-28-1975``: Vientiane rallied for abdication of the king occurred :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-1975``: December, As the Lao People's Revolutionary Party took over, monarchy was abolished. Lao became known as LPDR :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-1975``: By the time US troops evacuated Southeast Asia, 17,000 Hmong soldiers and 5,000 Hmong civilians were killed. An additional 100,000 Hmongs died in their flight from the communist Laos and Vietnam government to the US-backed Thailand refugee camps. In all, 122,000 Hmong lives were taken during and immediately after the Secret War :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-2-1975``: The Kingdom of Laos was now the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR). The Program of Action by the LPDR was enacted as well, and Kaysone Phomvihane replaced Prince Souphanouvong as the new leader. The royalty of Laos is effectively discontinued :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
