1981 to 1991 AD
===============

Keywords
--------

* ``bush president``
* ``reagan reelect``
* ``day lo``
* ``lpdr diminish``
* ``cbw``
* ``begin repatriate``
* ``begin broadcast``
* ``major opium``
* ``lpdr``
* ``charter``

Events
------

* Western scientists detected chemical agent used against Hmong, Cambodians and Afghanistanians. The origins of the chemicals used against the Hmongs were determined to be from the Soviet Union :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Lao and Hmong leaders, prompted by Prince Sisouk na Champassak and General Vang Pao, formed the United Lao National Liberation Front (ULNLF). Their goals were to break the conspiracy of silence and call for world support against the Kaysone government. ULNLF is also known as Neo Hom :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``3-7-1981``: At the request of several Hmong leaders, General Vang Pao wrote to the Secretary of State Haig to complain of the Department of State's accusation of Hmong as heroin traffickers. General Vang Pao asked for an investigation into the use of bio-toxic chemicals against the Hmongs :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-29-1981``: The Secretary of State's assistance's (John Holdridge) response to General Vang Pao reiterated that the UN had voted for an investigation and Congress has held hearings on the use of bio-toxin chemicals in Laos. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``5-9-1981``: Dr. Yang Dao presented a paper at the University of Minnesota in an attempt to exonerate himself from negative communist associations :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-10-1981``: Senator Hayakawa of California arrived in Laos. His visit is reported in March 1982, and although he is informed prior to his visit of bio-toxin chemical warfare against the Hmongs, Sen. Hayakawa's report does not mention anything regarding this issue :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-13-1981``: Secretary of State Alexander Haig revealed US physical evidence of bio-toxic chemicals used in Southeast Asia to the Berlin Press Association. His announcements suggested the producers of such chemicals were from the USSR. Haig's statements were based on the National Intelligence Estimates :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-10-1981``: US Senate Subcommittee on Arms Control scheduled hearing on biological weapons use in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-15-1981``: Dr. Khamseng Keo Sengsathit, Director of Public Health for LPDR, defected to China. He denounced the Le Duan (Vietnamese government) for the occupation of Laos, their expansionist policies and their use of chemical-biological weapons against national minorities :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Spring, LAWASIA launched investigation into CBW and concluded that CBW technology were employed in Southeast Asia :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* House of Rep held hearings on chemical-biological weapons use in Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistans. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``3-22-1982``: Secretary of State Alexander Haig submitted Chemical Warfare in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan based on National Intelligence Estimates. The report cited USSR and Vietnam use of CBW in Afghanistan and Southeast Asia, respectively :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``4-28-1982``: Jerry Daniels, a long-time friend of the Hmong and veteran of the Indochina atrocious saga, died :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-1983``: Ntawv Puaj Txwm, or the Syaboury Alphabet, is shown to United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees field officer, Nina Wimuttikosol, by Nkaj Vas Hawj :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* Jack Anderson and Dale Van Atta offered explanation regarding US disinterest in bio-toxic chemical use in Laos. They noted that CIA analyst and biological weapons (BW) expert Julian Hoptman, the dominating figure in BW, simply gave no credence to any report hinting the cheating of the Soviets due to his commitment to the 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Phang Day Lo died :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Reagan was reelected President :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-30-1984``: Nova's The Mystery of Yellow Rain was aired. A pro-Meselson bee-dung theory view was presented :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Thailand began to repatriate Hmong refugees to Laos :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Txoov Yias Yaj was invited by the Institute for Southeast Asian Studies in Kunming, Yunnan to teach RPA to the Hmong Chinese :cite:`1990:smalley`.
* ``6-1985``: June, Her Pa Kao, the leader of Chao Fa, appeared in Angola in a meeting with Angola's Jonas Savimbi, Nicaraguan Democratic Force representatives and Afghan mujahedeen. This meeting was sponsored by millionaire Lewis Lehrman, founder of Citizens for America. Pa Kao Her left the meeting coronated as head of the Lao freedom fighters. This coronation teared apart and confused the Hmong community internationally regarding who was the ultimate Hmong leader :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``8-1985``: August, Pa Kao Her appeared in Texas sponsored by the US Council for World Freedom, chaired by retired Army Major General John K Singlauv :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``9-21-1985``: Pa Kao Her's 6 hours meeting in St. Paul, MN with Hmong leaders was taped. Yang Dao was present at this meeting as well :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* "A Journey to Laos," is produced by American Friends Service Committee workers, Jacqui Chagnon and Roger Rumpf :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Thailand's National Security Chief reports LPDR was involved in heroin trafficking :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* LPDR narcotics-related corruption caused Laos not to receive US assistance :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Bush was President :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* UN and US chartered the Comprehensive Plan of Action :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Lawyers Committee for Human Rights issued reports warning that the procedure for determining refugee status was conducted haphazardly, that extortion and bribery were widespread and that the "Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Thailand has proven incapable of ensuring a reliable and fair procedure. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* Kaysone Phomvihane commended China for the crackdown on student demonstrations at Tiananmen Square. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* LPDR make clear linkage between cooperation with US on POW/MIAs and on narcotics issues :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``11-1989``: November, The Berlin Wall crumbled, and so does the rest of European communist governments :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-6-1989``: December, ULNLF announced creation of Provisional Democratic Government inside Laos with 10,000 troops. They elected Prince Suriyavong Vongsavang to be king. Prince Phayaluang Outhong would be prime minister and General Vang Pao would be first deputy prime minister. Kaysone was enraged and vowed to bomb Laos until the Free Lao forces were exterminated :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* LPDR remained a major opium trafficking state :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Glasnost and perestroika movement dominated Eastern Europe's communist policy :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Soviet support for LPDR diminished :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* Census report in China estimated 7,398,035 Miao in China :cite:`1996:zhang`. 3,686,900 in Guizhou 1,557,073 in Hunan 896,712 in Yunnan 535,923 in Sichuan 425,137 in Guanxi 200,702 in Hubei 52,044 in Nanhai
* ``1-4-1990``: 20 MiG-21s from Vietnam dropped explosive and CBW in resistance area :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``1-13-1990``: Resistance forces weakened significantly as PAVN and LPDR air forces bombed strategic areas. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``3-13-1990``: US-funded construction programs began in Laos as part of a $8.7 million several-year aid package. :cite:`1999:hamilton`
* ``6-4-1990``: LPDR pubished a draft of its constitution in Pasason newspaper :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``7-1990``: July, Lao resistance radio began to be broadcasted.
* ``7-1-1990``: Radio Station of the Government of Liberation and of the Lao Nation called for the abolition of Marxist-Lenin style of government :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-1990``: October, LPDR jailed communist cabinet vice-ministers for promoting a multi-party system :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``10-8-1990``: 6 LPDR officers denouncing Lao government were jailed. Phoumi Vongvichit was now acting President of LPDR :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
* ``12-8-1990``: "Laos: Human Rights in a Forgotten Country," took place at Yale :cite:`1999:hamilton`.
